---
title: bird-by-bird
date: 2020-01-19T02:56:15.115Z
layout: post
description: >-
  'I want people who write to crash or dive below the surface, where life is so
  cold and confusing and hard to see. I want writers to plunge through the
  holes--the holes we try to fill up with all the props. In those holes and the
  spaces around them exist all sorts of possibility, including the chance to see
  who we are and to glimpse the mystery.' --Anne Lamott
path: /posts/bird-by-bird
category: book report
tags:
  - writing
  - reading
  - journal
  - goals
---
On my quest to read twelve books this month, to finish things I'd long ago started, I've made some surprising and beautiful discoveries. Principally: [_Bird by Bird_](https://www.amazon.com/Bird-Some-Instructions-Writing-Life/dp/0385480016), by Anne Lamott. The book both presented me with wisdom, motivation, and directions, as well as a litany of reminders of why I live the way I do. It was indeed 'instructions on writing and life'. For me, perhaps, the instructions on life came through more clearly, but they did come alongside cogent and seemingly recursive reminders about writing and memories of what it used to feel like.

I have never stopped writing--I've painted on-and-off, drawn on-and-off, ran on-and-off, did yoga on-and-off, traveled, stayed at home, taught obsessively, then quit, I've lives in six different cities, loved and lost many people, but I have never stopped writing. It, couple with my morning coffee habit, is the singular constant, the one and only line, the fine thread snaking through it all, piercing tiny holes and hooking it all together, staying with me despite whatever or whoever else that I've left, or that's left me. 

So I've made my point: I've never stopped writing. But how I've written has fluctuated according to some fairly vast dimensions, as have my reasons for writing, and the feelings and thoughts I experience while doing it.

Sometimes I think I should write poetry, sometimes essays or memoirs. I haven't written fiction in over a decade--the last time I did was twenty-four, half in-love with someone from my past, and the protagonist in my short story was loosely based on him. I loved this man, the one I made up. I loved him and his fears, his miserable life, his neurosis, how he was so protective of his mother and sister, how he suppressed most of his feelings, how he was tortured by his mother's affinity for amusement parks, and how he was mortified by anything that veered terribly far from 'normal', or that hinted toward a loss of control. He had a grey car, a bland apartment, broke off a relationship with a coworker for reasons even he didn't believe, loved donuts, and spent a lot of time on his living room floor staring at the ceiling, wondering what the fuck he was doing with his life, squandering his desires and talents. He wondered and wondered but never stopped squandering everything, trying to control everything. I had great plans for this man, Harry, many stories I wanted to write for him, but I grew bored of him. I left him in an apartment in Boston where he was trying to start over, get a job in design. I left him there and haven't looked back. I'm sorry, Harry. You deserved better.

Anyway. What _Bird by Bird_ **__**made me remember was what it felt like to write fiction, and it made me wonder why I stopped so abruptly. I think, initially, I entered a period of fierce absorption. I was traveling, living abroad, navigating life in another language, falling in love. I just wanted to take it all in. I wrote and wrote and wrote but it was mostly documentation: of my feelings, of my surroundings, of what I observed, learned, thought. What horrified me, what electrified me. I used to live like that: with the sole purpose of being present, looking inward and outward, growing and expanding, experiencing whole-heartedly what it meant to be human. That used to be enough for me. I was going to take it all in and then _do something with it._ Write it into a story or something, make art about it, share it with the world, and then do it again. But, life gets messy, life gets hard. I lost sight of that objective: living to learn, absorb, grow, enjoy, and share. I got caught up in bad relationships, bad jobs, spent a couple years on food stamps, collecting debt and doubt and damages instead of memories in cloud forests.

But: those years are worthy experiences, too, even if not beautiful, or ideal, or what I'd had in mind when I said I wanted to 'experience everything'. They're material, too: both for making myself and my life better, for helping others... and, for writing. 

Teaching, which I won't go into, completely took over my life. I loved it, in many ways, but it invaded my brain and my heart and my body. Most of my writing then was journaling, or essays based on what I experienced at work, things I learned from my students. It was hard to be creative when I was at capacity (or over it) all of the time. And in the years since I quite teaching, I've felt like myself again: my heart flooded with ideas. My hands scurrying across the page, trying to get it all down, the thoughts, ideas, impressions, observations, things that made me pause with their beauty, their message. It's lovely to feel like myself again, but I also feel something like a solar system in its infancy: a vast and swirling hot mess. Debris everywhere, dust and fire and rock colliding and colluding in a great and brightly colored cloud. I'm desperate to get all this stuff to begin gathering itself into planets and moons with a stellar core, and for a while I've felt helpless to get this to start happening.

But _Bird by Bird_ made me think that I am perhaps more in control of this interstellar disaster than I'd previously thought.

For the past few years, the number of ideas is excessive. I can't do something with all of them. And so I write them all down, all over the place. I collect book marks for research that become more endless lists, I have notes and ideas in emails, in journals, in sketchbooks, in my writing app. I have all these ideas and only a handful became finished pieces. Many have been started but never completed. Many more I just don't know what to do with. _It's a poem_, I think, then _no, it's an essay_. Or, _maybe its both, some kind of hybrid genre_. And I spin my wheels endlessly in this way, writing down more and more ideas and impressions that go nowhere. I've been revising two-three essays for the past year and half, two are nearly done. I've written several dozen poems, am revising a handful, have finished one. I have neither written nor considered any fiction. I've journaled a lot. But I've never really sat down and just _written_.

And I think that's the key. The way Ms. Lamott wrote about writing made me realize I've been neglecting this very sacred process. I've been obsessed with starting and finishing, rather than the process. So I have elected short forms, forgetting that those, too, can take a long time, or I've started but never finished. Meanwhile, my brain and heart become increasingly backed up, both overflowing and jam-packed, because I'm not just sitting down to write. I'm not dedicating myself to the process, I'm not getting the garbage out of the way so the good stuff can come out. It horrifies me, a little, when I look at what I'm writing and see that it's trash; saccharin, cliche, dull, self-indulgent. It's never felt nice to realize I'm writing hot garbage, but I think it scares me more now than it used to. _Now_ because I've sacrificed a lot to follow my desire, my _need_, to write, to make something out of words and (try to) share it with the world. I left teaching and moved to a new city to start a different career, one that would allow space and time for writing. I acquired more debt, I've not prioritized dating, meeting a guy a could marry, maybe have a family with. And what if it's all for not? What if I'm a horrendously awful writer and I've been fooling myself since the fifth grade? 

The what-ifs could trail into eternity, so let's stop here. Because the truth is that I won't know whether or not my fears are true unless I let all the garbage come seeping out, steaming and stinking and scary. And because it won't all be garbage. Last night I wrote a lot of dribble about woods but then this strange little story about a young girl came out too, so did descriptions about clay hillsides that refused to grow any plants. THERE IS SO MUCH IN MY HEAD. **So many places:** cities, countries, classrooms, apartments, forests, restaurants, cafes, dance floors, beaches, boats, offices, airplanes. **So many people:** men I've loved, men who have nearly destroyed me, men who have, in odd little ways, helped me to heal. Friends who have stayed, friends I've lost, strangers in coffee shops, gas stations, breakfast spots. People on the train, people at all my jobs, people in the DSS office, kids in my classrooms, parents on the phone. My family, and the friends who feel like family. **And so many things**: stones, rocks, trees, leaves, flower specimen, myths, facts, comparisons, metaphors about math and computers and organic materials, chemical transitions, shells and soils, water in all its forms. And of course this list isn't complete, not even close.

But I hope I've made my point: theres a lot in my head. A whole solar system's worth. And it can't spool itself out into tidy little celestial bodies unless it has a mechanism for movement, some kind of velocity. Some of it might get lost, get spit out into the asteroid belt, become a trailing comet, or the rings of a gas giant. But I can't continue to hold it all in for fear that it won't come out right, or beautifully, or how it's "supposed to". So I'm going to start writing it all down. Everything that I've absorbed, taken in, witnessed, thought about, felt, learned from, journaled (because how I _journal_ and how I _write_ are indeed different processes), I'm going to start writing it all down. In descriptions, or as stories, with a prompt, without one, maybe as a part of an exercise, maybe just as word vomit. And I'll have to revisit it, cull it for good stuff, be reminded, again and again, that yes, I write trash sometimes, but hopefully also: _not always_. 

I think the more I write, the more I moved my hands and my mind, the more it comes out of me, the more my ideas will be allowed to take shape, become things I can follow, can finish. Some might be poems, others essays, and I really do think some will be fiction. I'm excited to see what happens!

Last words from Anne Lamott:

> 'A big heart is both a clunky and delicate thing; it doesn't protect itself, and it doesn't hide.'
