---
title: The pleasure of waiting
date: 2020-02-15T19:24:59.319Z
layout: post
description: >-
  All of my life, I have moved quickly. In body, in mind, in heart. I walk
  quickly, think quickly, talk quickly, feel emotions readily. So the tendency
  has been: emotion or impulse or thought fills my being and I act upon it!
  Surely if something feels so solid and real, it must be true, must be
  reliable...right? 
path: /posts/the-pleasure-of-waiting
category: journal
tags:
  - learning
  - health
  - personal
  - living
  - love
---
All of my life, I have moved quickly. In body, in mind, in heart. I walk quickly, think quickly, talk quickly, feel emotions readily. So the tendency has been: emotion or impulse or thought fills my being and I act upon it! Surely if something feels so solid and real, it must be true, must be reliable...right? 

Sometimes, yes, but often... not at all. And that's the tricky part: sometimes certain thoughts and feelings that feel true, _are_ true. But they're often not. So the question then becomes: _how do you tell the difference?_

You wait.

This is deceptively simple. At least for me. There are certain types of waiting I can do, and others I fail miserably at. I am horrendous at waiting when I have a strong thought or feeling. It is one of my worst skills. And something I've failed to realize is that waiting when you're filled with such strong feeling is actually the best thing you can do. My life has forced me to wait a lot these past few years. I waited on answers from graduate programs (all NO's), I waited on a city that felt like a good place to move to 'start over'. I waited for a long time to figure out a plan that would also me to get out of serving food, out of debt, and into a career I enjoyed that would allow me to keep my creativity and emotional energy in tact (teaching did not). A lot of good came from waiting those things out. It wasn't easy, but what made it easi_er_ was that there wasn't any strong emotion or impulse. I also had no choice. What do you do when you have NO IDEA what you're going to do with your life if not teach or waitress? You wait, actively, maybe trying out things that feel like they could work until you find one that does... but you're still waiting.

If I am overly excited, filled with feeling or impulse, or am angry, or terrified, or just plain distraught, however, and you ask me to wait? Well, forget it. My inability to wait (or think clearly about whatever feeling or idea was consuming me) was what lead me to move all the way out to Oregon when I was 23. I was obsessed, I couldn't shake the idea that I was "supposed" to be there. I lost a job and a lot of money moving out there. I also lost a lot of self-confidence, because the plan clearly backfired; I didn't like living out there at all. My impulses also brought me to South America--and that _was_ actually a good thing, because it was a sort of side door entry (more on that below). But they also lead me to date a man down there who was terrible for me, and behave in terrible ways when we were together. This pattern has more or less continued, but with a gently increasing ability to say to myself "Am I doing it again?" or "Wait, Katie. Slow down."

Another trick is: impulse feels a lot like intuition. But impulse is loud. Intuition is quiet. You can't hear intuition when you're consumed by impulse. The desire to move out west an impulse, loud and obsessive. The move to South America? It was an idea I happened upon by accident. It was actually the side effect of another impulse failing. I was excited to go down there, but I was not filled with fantasy the way I was before Oregon.

Contrary to popular belief, leaving teaching, leaving Rochester, and moving to Atlanta was not on an impulse. I debated whether or not to leave for over a year. I doubted the idea, I was terrified I was going to make a terrible mistake, and I no real positive feelings about it. I didn't want to leave Rochester, I loved it there. It has my favorite coffee shop in the universe (Java's downtown), my favorite park (Highland), my favorite bar (Lux), and some of the prettiest beaches in the Great Lakes. And yet leaving just felt like what I had to do to get my life back on track. I wasn't super excited about Atlanta, but I was glad I was about to have a fresh start in a warm, sunny, city where I already knew a few lovely people. 

So living here has always been a little challenging. There are some things I love about it (my dear friends and family, the giant trees, the heat, the sun, the chorus of insects all summer, that I can take the train to work, that it feels like a city that is vibrant and alive), but there are even more things I really struggle with (I won't list them), and make it feel like the kind of place that was perhaps great for a reboot, but not a place for me to stay. 

Last spring, in the midst of a terrible stressful job search, I was slammed with my first strong impulse in years: _go home._ It took over my mind, body, and spirit in a way I hadn't felt in a very long time. I was tempted to listen to it. The fantasy wheel started groaning to life, spinning at first slowly and then with ferocious velocity. I started adding 'Buffalo' to my job search criteria. I applied for a handful of jobs there. I was filled with relief. This phase was about to over, I could just go home and relax and all of this stress and desperation would just be over.

That's another indication that you're listening to an impulse and not an intuition: it often takes the form of (supposed) immediate relief (I thought I'd 'finally fit in' or 'find my people' in Portland). It also has a lot of 'supposed to' threaded into it--always the symptom of a fantasy or impulse woven tale: "that's where I'm supposed to be! this is all how it was supposed to work out!" This is the kind of thinking I learned to stop listening to during a very sad moment operating a cash register in a smoothie shop in September of 2017. It was momentarily tragic, and then very, very freeing. If there is no 'supposed to', then my life can be anything, anywhere, with anyone; and it's up to me to make it worth living.

So anyway. During the height of this 'go home' impulse last spring, which I was moving through very quickly (speed is another warning sign that it's impulse and not intuition), I started to hear this very faint but persistent voice. It said one word, over and over: "_Stay"._

I recognized it as intuition (years ago I wouldn't have even heard it, and certainly wouldn't have acknowledged it if I did) and so I listened to it. I continued applying in both cities, but refocused my job search in Atlanta, and within a month, I was offered a very good job. So I stayed.

But so did that hovering impulse to move home. It's been ebbing and flowing since it came to me last May. I have financial relief, sure, but I was still looking for relief from the loneliness of still being single at 35, being in a new city and not knowing a ton of people, being far from my family and far from home. But seeking relief precludes us from actually finding happiness, or making choices that are truly good for us and not just an anecdote to some bothersome aspect of the human condition.

A few weeks ago, I decided I had _had it_ with a guy I was kind of dating. He wasn't communicating, he wasn't doing what I wanted, and our connection was falling apart. I was enraged. It became worse whenever we tried to talk about it. It felt like I was speaking to a wall. I wasted a week feeling sad, angry, desperate, rejected, and horribly, hopelessly alone and like I was probably going to be single forever. We had one big long conversation where I realized I was a part of the problem, too. We made plans to maybe go to the art gallery that weekend, if I was up for it. I told him I needed to think about it. This was the beginning of a very good thing.

I rarely or never say that. Never in love, rarely in life. It requires the kind of waiting I despise. It requires waiting and sitting through intensely strong or intensely uncomfortable emotions. I'd rather just act on those emotions: get upset, or obsessively try to "fix" the situation to make  those feelings go away. I thought about it, and decided to go to the art gallery. I went. We considered other ways of continuing our relationship and friendship. Again, I told him I would have to think about it. This was harder: it became a week of waiting and thinking. Being visited by nasty, negative thoughts that filled me with some terrible emotion, and I would want to call him and demand an explanation for something, or ask him a question whose answer I hoped would provide me relief. But the more I waited, the more I disallowed myself from acting on impulse, the more I was able to see the situation honestly, and my role in it.

Sure, he'd been a bit of a jerk on occasion, but I'd been inconsiderate and selfish in my own ways. I won't bother listing them here as it's not the point of this post. The point is that waiting, sitting through those fierce waves of emotions and allowing them to recede, allowed me access to various truths I'd been unable (and yet also desperately trying) to see. I thought by asking him endless questions I'd get an answer, but the answer wasn't available in a Q & A format. I had to simply wait. I should have waited to see if he could meet my needs without making repeat demands and accusations. And if he couldn't meet those needs, then what would that mean for our romance? Our friendship? I could't bear those kinds of unknowns--the relief I felt after being single for four years, or from the constant fear of being single for the rest of my life, felt too good to give up. 

But once I had to give those hopes up, I was being asked to wait again. I had to wait and see how I felt about continuing our friendship, or about continuing some kind of romance with radically different boundaries and expectations. I thought I was waiting to see if I could forgive him, but what I ended up doing a lot more of was _forgiving myself_. Waiting allowed the rubble to settle, and it allowed me to see the whole scenario clearly and calmly: where and why he went wrong, but more importantly, where I went wrong. I felt badly at first about what I'd done, but I was slowly able to forgive myself, too. It felt good to apologize to him: and not the in sometimes desperate way I have before, but sincerely, calmly. Nor was I waiting for him to apologizing to me. For the first time in my life, I interacted with a man without expectation. It felt good.

The gems uncovered in waiting about a boy spilled over into other realms of my life, and rather quickly. I immediately saw how much more of this non-judgmental patience I needed to incorporate into the fabric of my daily life. I found a meditation course on love--because I want to find deep love with a partner, but it requires... waiting! Listening to the meditations and doing the 'homework' also provided and immediate sense of calm, of acceptance. 

I'm sure it helps that I've been reading almost exclusively philosophical and spiritual books this month (with Pema Chödrön being my longtime favorite). So much of what I experienced in waiting with this boy and heard in those meditations on love corresponded to what I was already reading in my books. My head and heart was finally ready for it: for trying to do things a different way and not falling back into old patterns that, while familiar and comfortable, are also destructive and generally unhelpful. It makes waiting feel like an OK thing to do, maybe even a great thing. Waiting for the kind of love that I want, waiting to figure out what city I want to live in, waiting to see where my life takes me. Because when you're desperate for relief (from being single, from feeling like you're in the wrong place, from whatever), making informed decisions is difficult, and waiting feels impossible. 

But Atlanta is OK. And I am OK here, and I have a good job and good people in my life. It isn't where I want to stay, and I know I want to be much closer to family, but I don't feel in a panicked rush to get out or get home. I am still considering moving home, but I'm also considering a few other cities _near_ my hometown that have perhaps better job markets and literary communities--things that are very important to me, rather than ideas that simply provide relief. And love? Of course I still want it. I'm still working my way through the meditation course! But I also feel more at peace with my circumstances than I have in... probably ever? I'm also more hopeful. "I'll NEVER meet someone I really want to be with" has turned into "Of course I will meet someone I really want to be with. I don't know where or when, but if I live long enough, I'll find it!" And it doesn't feel like I'm placating or reassuring myself, it just feels like something that is true. And I wish I'd been able to see this kind of truth a long time ago, but... things take the time they take.

And I also think: _waiting isn't the only thing that did it_. I have been working on myself for years. I've gone to therapy, read loads of books on the mind and the tricks it can play, on buddhism. I've reflected and journaled extensively. I've investigated some very dark areas of my persona, and am fairly comfortable with my flaws (at least: the ones I know of!). But I continually avoided waiting. Being forced to wait _and_ having many of the necessary the tools and skills ready to make that waiting fruitful is what did the trick. You can wait and wait and wait but if you can't look at yourself honestly, waiting might not provide much clarity. It might provide some calm, but you could very well still be digging your heels in, refusing to see the situation in any other way, unable to take full responsibility for your role in the mess, whatever the mess may be. 

I'm glad I'm still on good terms with this guy. It means progress. It means I don't always have to explode with emotion anytime something doesn't go my way. I'd like to blame the fact that I've dated some horrible men who made me this way, but the truth it: I've always been like this. Those men indeed caused damage that took a lot of work to undo, and they might have made some of my reactive tendencies worse, but they didn't give them to me. I can't just throw all the blame onto them, despite the fact that they were really all tremendous turds. It also means I will be able to better handle myself the next time I date a guy and things don't work out how I want them to; and it'll make waiting for one of the right ones a lot easier. I'm also glad that I'm seeking a new home calmly, because it means the decision I make is going to be based on what I know is good for me, not what will provide me relief from my troubles. The relief never lasts, fantasy never delivers, and so many questions cannot be answered with words, or speed.

Love, KD
